Let us know you agree to cookies
We use cookies to give you the best online experience. Please let us know if you agree to all of these cookies.

Yes, I agree

No, take me to settings

BBC Homepage
Skip to content
Accessibility Help
Sign in
Notifications
Home
News
Sport
Weather
iPlayer
Sounds
More
Search
BBC News
Home
Brexit
Coronavirus
UK
World
Business
Politics
Tech
Science
Health
Family & Education
More
UK
England
N. Ireland
Scotland
Alba
Wales
Cymru
Local News
NHS 1% pay rise is 'as much as we can give' - Boris Johnson
Published15 hours ago
Share
Related Topics
Coronavirus pandemic

media captionPrime Minister defends NHS 1% pay rise recommendation
Prime Minister Boris Johnson has defended plans to give some NHS staff in England a 1% pay rise, amid warnings that "undervalued" nurses could quit.

The government is giving workers "as much as we can" in the "tough times" of the Covid pandemic, Mr Johnson said.

The rise, which is being considered by an independent panel, would cover most hospital staff.

Labour says the proposal goes against a government "promise" made last year to give NHS workers a 2.1% pay rise.

Shadow health secretary Jonathan Ashworth said Chancellor Rishi Sunak had been "cowardly" when he "sneaked" out the announcement a day after his Budget.

The Department of Health and Social Care has been under pressure to reconsider its pay proposal since last week, when it officially recommended the 1% rise to the independent panel that advises the government on NHS salaries.

Nurses have described the proposed pay rise as "insulting", with unions threatening strike action and warning that the "pitiful" rise may lead staff to quit their jobs - worsening staffing issues in the health service.

'Undervalued' nurses may quit over 1% rise - union
Nurses prepare for strikes over 1% NHS pay rise
Ministers will make their final decision in May after the independent panel makes its own pay recommendations.

Asked about the proposed pay rise on a visit to a coronavirus vaccination centre in Brent in north London, Mr Johnson said: "What we have done is try to give them as much as we can at the present time.

"Don't forget that there has been a public sector pay freeze, we're in pretty tough times."

He added he was "massively grateful" to "heroic" health and social care workers during the pandemic.

But the Royal College of Nursing reiterated its calls for the government to make a U-turn on the 1% offer.

The union's general secretary, Dame Donna Kinnair, said: "More of these warm words for nurses are not going to cut it."

2px presentational grey line
Analysis box by Iain Watson, political correspondent
The PM's comments are not the last word on pay.

An independent review body will make its recommendations on NHS salaries in May. If it's worried about retention and recruitment of staff, it could say that pay should rise above 1%.

The government would then have a dilemma - either to ignore the recommendation, or make cuts elsewhere to fund a bigger increase.

But the review body could equally present a challenge to the opposition.

The shadow health secretary Jon Ashworth condemned a 1% rise as "a disgrace" but said Labour would "honour whatever that review body recommends".

During the years of austerity, it wasn't uncommon for pay review bodies to act within constraints set by government.

So if the independent panel were to support a 1% rise after all, the Labour leadership would need to rethink its position, or face a backlash from the unions.

2px presentational grey line
Labour's Mr Jonathan Ashworth said Conservative MPs had already voted for a pay rise of 2.1% for NHS workers when a long-term spending plan for the health service passed through the House of Commons in January 2020.

"Not only was it promised, it was budgeted for and it was legislated for - this is the law of the land," he said.

"That should be the basis for which negotiations and discussions are now entered into with the trade unions."

The Department of Health maintains that the assumption of a 2.1% pay rise was not enshrined in law, and the financial pressures from the pandemic could not have been foreseen.

Royal College of Nursing fair pay campaign billboard
IMAGE COPYRIGHTGETTY IMAGES
image captionThe Royal College of Nursing has centred its response to the pay proposals on the idea the rise would mean £3.50 more per week in take-home pay for experienced nurses
The prime minister said the government had "tried to give the NHS as much as we possibly can" to tackle Covid, and had provided £62bn to the health service on top of its usual annual allocation of £140bn.

Pressed by the BBC's Andrew Marr on whether there could be a rethink on the pay rise, Education Secretary Gavin Williamson said: "What the government has put forward has been passed to an independent review.

"We've put forward what we believe we can afford and [it] is part of a process and that [is] what will be looked at," he added.

"But really, our focus is on making sure we recover from this pandemic."

2px presentational grey line
What do NHS workers in England earn?
The lowest minimum full-time salary - for newly-employed drivers, housekeeping assistants, nursery assistants and domestic support workers - is £18,005 per year
The starting salary for most newly-qualified nurses is £24,907
Staff in "high-cost areas", such as London, get extra payments
2px presentational grey line
A government spokesperson has previously said a 1% pay rise would be a "real-terms increase", as the latest official inflation figure was 0.9%.

Dame Donna has warned the rise would mean just £3.50 more per week in take-home pay for an experienced nurse.

At least 1.3 million other public sector staff - including teachers, the armed forces, firefighters and police officers - are about to have their pay frozen for a year.

Banner image reading 'more about coronavirus'
SYMPTOMS: What are they and how to guard against them?
LOOK-UP TOOL: How many cases in your area?
SOCIAL DISTANCING: How can I meet my friend safely?
Banner
The NHS in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland is run by the devolved administrations.

The Scottish government has announced that 2021-22 pay negotiations will be delayed until the summer because of the disruption caused by Covid. Staff have been given an "interim" pay rise of 1%, which will form part of the new settlement.

NHS workers in Northern Ireland were promised a one-off £500 "special recognition" payment in January, following a similar announcement in Scotland.

The Welsh government has said it will not set a "ceiling" of 1% on NHS pay rises for 2021-22.

Around the BBC - Sounds
THAT PETER CROUCH PODCAST: Crouchy and the boys discuss a footballer’s entourage...
MONEY MOVES WITH TONI TONE: Author and financial content creator Bola Sol joins Toni to talk about how to embrace change and find opportunities
Around the BBC footer - Sounds
Related Topics
Boris Johnson
Gavin Williamson
Brent
Coronavirus pandemic
NHS
More on this story
'Undervalued' nurses may quit over 1% rise - union
Published1 day ago
Hancock defends 1% NHS pay rise after strike threats
Published2 days ago
Nurses prepare for strikes over 1% NHS pay rise
Published2 days ago
Top Stories
Meghan 'didn't want to be alive anymore'
In a deeply personal TV interview, Meghan tells Oprah Winfrey that she did not get help when she asked for it.

Published33 minutes ago
Meghan: Royal had concerns about son's skin colour
Published8 hours ago
Millions of pupils going back to school in England
Published7 hours ago
Features
12 things we learned from Meghan's Oprah interview
Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge and Meghan, Duchess of Sussex attend the Women's Singles Final of the Wimbledon Tennis Championships at All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club
The woman with HIV helping others have a 'good death'
Thembi standing by a board with HIV symbols
Naga Munchetty: It’s time to talk about race
Naga Munchetty
'The first black fairytale' gets modern reworking
Eddie Murphy and Shari Headley in Coming 2 America
The hunt for impartial jurors in George Floyd trial
A woman walks past a boarded up store front with a George Floyd mural
The ballerina dancing on ice for a real ‘swan lake’ VideoThe ballerina dancing on ice for a real ‘swan lake’
Ilmira Bagrautinova
Could lab-grown meat help tackle climate change? VideoCould lab-grown meat help tackle climate change?
Last year Singapore approved the sale of 'chicken' grown in a lab. What is it exactly - and could it be better for the planet?
How will testing work in schools?
School illustration
Five ways children could make up for lost school time
schoolboy concentrating on his work
Elsewhere on the BBC
What made Harriet Tubman a real force for change?
Discover the incredible life of the legendary American hero and abolitionist

Harriet Tubman
A young girl who is the voice of a generation
The story of teenage climate activist Greta Thunberg

Greta Thunberg
Most Read
Meghan 'didn't want to be alive anymore'
1
Billionaire Mackenzie Scott marries science teacher
2
12 things we learned from Meghan's Oprah interview
3
'Caution as pupils return' and 'Meghan speaks out'
4
Crowds of celebrating Rangers fans 'disgraceful'
5
Detectives confirm last sighting of missing woman
6
Women set for '£100,000 pension pay gap' with men
7
New guidance to help flat owners stuck in 'limbo'
8
Naga Munchetty: It’s time to talk about race
9
Millions of pupils going back to school in England
10
BBC News Services
On your mobile
On smart speakers
Get news alerts
Contact BBC News
Iconic Women on the BBC
Michaela Coel's unmissable drama. iPlayerMichaela Coel's unmissable drama
AttributionBBC iPlayer

Revisiting unforgettable interviewees. AudioRevisiting unforgettable interviewees
AttributionBBC Sounds

The true tale of the US sex equality war. iPlayerThe true tale of the US sex equality war
AttributionBBC iPlayer

No topic is taboo for Poppy and Rubina. AudioNo topic is taboo for Poppy and Rubina
AttributionBBC Sounds

Home
News
Sport
Weather
iPlayer
Sounds
CBBC
CBeebies
Food
Bitesize
Arts
Taster
Local
Three
Terms of Use
About the BBC
Privacy Policy
Cookies
Accessibility Help
Parental Guidance
Contact the BBC
Get Personalised Newsletters
Why you can trust the BBC
